README.md, before:

# Introduction to Swift with Games 

## Course Description 

We will be learning the fundamentals of the Swift, by cloning and building our very own iOS game. 

## Course Specifics

Weeks to Completion:  7 <br>
Total Seat Hours:  37.5 hours <br>
Total Out-of-Class Hours: 75 hours <br>
Total Hours: 112.5 hours <br>
Units:  3 units <br>
Delivery Method:  Residential <br>
Class Sessions:  14 classes, 7 labs 

## Prerequisites:  

None <br>

## Learning Objectives or Competencies

Students by the end of the course will be able to ...

1. Write working Swift code
1. Set breakpoints to inspect and debug code
1. Use Swift tools/principles/concepts to build a game

## Lessons

Should be ~13 planned lessons (7 weeks x 2 meetings per week -~1 holiday)

1. Lesson Title
    - **Before Class**
    - **Class Topic**
    - **In Class Activities**
    - **After Class**
1. Lesson Title
    - **Class Topic**
    - **In Class Activities**
    - **After Class**
1. Lesson Title
    - **Class Topic**
    - **In Class Activities**
    - **After Class**

## Tutorials & Projects

- [Simple iOS Game 1]()
- [Simple iOS Game 2]()

## Evaluation

To pass this course you must meet the following requirements:

- No more than two no call no shows
- No more than four excused absences
- Make up all classwork from all absences
- Finish all required tutorials and projects
- Pass the final exam (summative assessment) with >=80%

## Make School Course Policies

[Academic Honesty](https://github.com/Product-College-Courses/Common-Syllabus-Sections/blob/master/Academic-Honesty-and-Plagiarism.md)<br>
[Accomodation Policy](https://github.com/Product-College-Courses/Common-Syllabus-Sections/blob/master/Accommodation-Policy.md)<br>
[Diversity Statement](https://github.com/Product-College-Courses/Common-Syllabus-Sections/blob/master/Diversity-Statement.md)<br>
[Evaluation Methods](https://github.com/Product-College-Courses/Common-Syllabus-Sections/blob/master/Evaluation-Methods.md)
<br>
[Title IX Disclaimer](https://github.com/Product-College-Courses/Common-Syllabus-Sections/blob/master/Evaluations-Title-X-Disclaimer.md)<br>
[Program Learning Outcomes](https://github.com/Product-College-Courses/Common-Syllabus-Sections/blob/master/Program-Learning-Outcomes.md)

Commit message:

add more competencies and overview of first lesson

README.md, after:

# Introduction to Swift with Games

## Course Description

We will be learning the fundamentals of the Swift, by cloning and building our very own iOS game.

## Course Specifics

Weeks to Completion:  7 <br>
Total Seat Hours:  37.5 hours <br>
Total Out-of-Class Hours: 75 hours <br>
Total Hours: 112.5 hours <br>
Units:  3 units <br>
Delivery Method:  Residential <br>
Class Sessions:  14 classes, 7 labs

## Prerequisites:  

None <br>

## Learning Objectives or Competencies

Students by the end of the course will be able to ...

1. Write working Swift code
1. Apply OOP principles in Swift
1. Apply knowledge in Structs, Classes, Protocols, Enums and other basic Swift types to building an iOS game.
1. Set breakpoints to inspect and debug code
1. Compare and contrast variables and constants in Swift
1. Identify Swift keywords and constructs
1. Use Xcode to build and run an iOS Game


## Lessons

Should be ~13 planned lessons (7 weeks x 2 meetings per week -~1 holiday)

1. Introduction to Mobile Development in Swift
    - **Before Class**
      - Complete all course pre-work
    - **In Class Activities**
      - Why are we learning about Mobile Development?
      - Identify mobile Development in the scope of Software Development
    - **After Class**
      - Begin [Simple iOS Game Tutorial](www.google.com)
1. Lesson Title
    - **Class Topic**
    - **In Class Activities**
    - **After Class**
1. Lesson Title
    - **Class Topic**
    - **In Class Activities**
    - **After Class**

## Tutorials & Projects

- [Simple iOS Game 1]()
- [Simple iOS Game 2]()

## Evaluation

To pass this course you must meet the following requirements:

- No more than two no call no shows
- No more than four excused absences
- Make up all classwork from all absences
- Finish all required tutorials and projects
- Pass the final exam (summative assessment) with >=80%

## Make School Course Policies

[Academic Honesty](https://github.com/Product-College-Courses/Common-Syllabus-Sections/blob/master/Academic-Honesty-and-Plagiarism.md)<br>
[Accomodation Policy](https://github.com/Product-College-Courses/Common-Syllabus-Sections/blob/master/Accommodation-Policy.md)<br>
[Diversity Statement](https://github.com/Product-College-Courses/Common-Syllabus-Sections/blob/master/Diversity-Statement.md)<br>
[Evaluation Methods](https://github.com/Product-College-Courses/Common-Syllabus-Sections/blob/master/Evaluation-Methods.md)
<br>
[Title IX Disclaimer](https://github.com/Product-College-Courses/Common-Syllabus-Sections/blob/master/Evaluations-Title-X-Disclaimer.md)<br>
[Program Learning Outcomes](https://github.com/Product-College-Courses/Common-Syllabus-Sections/blob/master/Program-Learning-Outcomes.md)
