01-Variables-Types-&-Functions/README.md, before:

# Variables, Types & Functions

## Lesson Overview
- 5 min Intro & Objectives
- 10 min Think, Pair Share
- 20 min TT on Variables, Types(Built in & User generated) and Functions in Swift
- 30 min  First set of challenges on variables & functions
- 10 min Break
- 10 min TT and demo of refactoring and scope with functions
- 15 min Q&A and Introduction to *tutorials*
- 20 min Second set of challenges on variables & functions
- Wrap up

## Objectives & Competencies
1. Identify and use variables
1. Identify and define types in Swift
1. Compare and contrast variables and constants
1. Identify and write comments in code
1. Construct and use functions to encapsulate code
1. Compare and contrast between mutable and immutable data

## Class Materials

Slides:

[Swift Types](assets/swift-types.key)

## Baseline Challenges

**Variables & Functions**
1. Work with a partner to come up with an analogy for types in Swift. Focus on the purpose and use of types.

1. [Variables Swift Playgrounds](assets/variables.zip)
1. [Functions Swift Playgrounds](assets/functions.zip)

Commit message:

add links to swift csp playgrounds for lesson 1 & 2

01-Variables-Types-&-Functions/README.md, after:

# Variables, Types & Functions

## Lesson Overview
- 5 min Intro & Objectives
- 10 min Think, Pair Share
- 20 min TT on Variables, Types(Built in & User generated) and Functions in Swift
- 30 min  First set of challenges on variables & functions
- 10 min Break
- 10 min TT and demo of refactoring and scope with functions
- 15 min Q&A and Introduction to *tutorials*
- 20 min Second set of challenges on variables & functions
- Wrap up

## Objectives & Competencies
By the end of this lesson, students should be able to:

1. Identify and use variables
1. Identify and define types in Swift
1. Compare and contrast variables and constants
1. Identify and write comments in code
1. Construct and use functions to encapsulate code
1. Compare and contrast between mutable and immutable data
1. Create and call functions
1. Pass data into a function
1. Return values from a function


## Class Materials

Slides:

[Swift Variables, Types & Functions](assets/swift-types.key)

## Baseline Challenges

**Variables & Functions**
1. Work with a partner to come up with an analogy for types in Swift. Focus on the purpose and use of types.

1. [Variables Swift Playgrounds](https://github.com/MakeSchool-Tutorials/Intro-Variables-Swift-Playground/archive/swift4.zip)
<!-- https://github.com/MakeSchool-Tutorials/Intro-Variables-Swift-Playground.git -->
1. [Functions Swift Playgrounds](https://github.com/MakeSchool-Tutorials/Intro-Functions-Swift-Playground/archive/master.zip)
<!-- https://github.com/MakeSchool-Tutorials/Intro-Functions-Swift-Playground.git -->
