Lessons/02-Optionals-&-Conditionals/README.md, before:

<!-- Run this slideshow via the following command: -->
<!-- reveal-md README.md -w -->


<!-- .slide: class="header" -->
# Optionals and Conditionals

## [Slides](https://make-school-courses.github.io/MOB-1.1-Introduction-to-Swift/Slides/02-Optionals-&-Conditionals/README.html ':ignore')

<!-- > -->

## Agenda

- Learning Objectives
- Conditionals
- Activity on Conditionals
- Break
- Optionals
- Activity on Optionals
- Wrap Up

<!-- > -->

## Learning Objectives

By the end of this lesson, students should be able to:

1. Use conditional statements in Swift
1. Identify and use optionals in Swift code
1. Understand the importance of optional binding
1. List & apply ways for unwrapping an optional value

<!-- > -->

## Initial Exercise

Questions from the Repl.its?

General questions?

<!-- > -->

## Conditionals

Swift has several constructs to handle control flow in a program. Using comparison operators and the type Boolean we can manipulate the flow of our apps.

<aside class="notes">
When we have a program and want to tell it to go through a specific path, we evaluate a condition before choosing the path. This is how we manage control flow in our programs.
</aside>

<!-- v -->

### Comparison operators


|          |                           |
|:--------:|:-------------------------:|
|   >=     | greater than or equal to  |
|   >      | greater than              |
|   <=     | less than or equal to     |
|   <      | less than                 |
|   !=     | not equal to              |
|   ==     | equal to                  |
|   &&     | and                       |
|   ||     | or                        |

<aside class="notes">
*and* and *or* will let us combine operators

*and* used to check if both conditions are true

*or* used to check if at least one condition is true
</aside>

<!-- v -->

### (4 < 8 && 6 > 8) || 1 < 2

<aside class="notes">
quick check: is this true or false?
</aside>

<!-- > -->

## if Statement

The most common way to control the flow of a program.

Allows the program to execute the block **only** if the condition is true.

```swift
if "some" != "sum" {
  print("These are not the same word.")
}
```

<aside class="notes">
If the condition is true, then the statement will execute the code between the braces. If the condition is false, it will skip the block of code.
</aside>

<!-- v -->

### else Clause

Extending the if statement

```swift
let color = "purple"

if color == "red" || color == "green" || color == "blue" {
  print("This is a primary color")
} else {
  print("This is not a primary color")
}
```

<aside class="notes">
We can extend an if statement to have code run in case the condition is false.
</aside>

<!-- v -->

#### Question

What will print to the console?

```swift
var weight = 52

if weight <= 50 {
    print("Have a great flight.")
} else {
    print("There is a $25 fee for your luggage.")
}
```

<!-- v -->

### else if Clause

```swift
let studentCount = 35
var message = ""

if studentCount < 5 {
  message = "Class won't run"
} else if studentCount < 25{
  message = "Class will run"
} else if studentCount < 30 {
  message = "Class is packed"
} else {
  message = "We need another section"
}
print(message)
```

Nested if statements test multiple conditions one by one until a condition is true. Only the code associated with that first true condition is executed, regardless of whether subsequent else-if conditions are true. Order matters!

<aside class="notes">
Sometimes we want to check one condition after another. We use the else-if clause to nest an if statement in the else clause of a previous if statement.
The last else clause is optional. We might not always need it.
</aside>

<!-- v -->

### Small prompt

Having:

```swift
let a = 5
let b = 10

var min: Int
var max: Int
```

Write code that will save the smaller number in *min* and the greater number in *max*.

<!-- v -->

### Ternary operator

```swift
(<CONDITION>) ? <TRUE VALUE> : <FALSE VALUE>
```

```swift
a < b ? a : b
a > b ? a : b
```
<aside class="notes">
The ternary operator takes a condition and returns one of two values, depending on whether the condition was true or false.
</aside>

<!-- v -->

### Question

What is the value of `mood` after executing the following:

```swift
let numberOfCookies = 3

let mood = numberOfCookies > 2 ? 😊 : 😔
```

<!-- > -->

## In Class Activity

- [Conditionals - Playground](https://github.com/Make-School-Courses/MOB-1.1-Introduction-to-Swift/blob/master/Lessons/02-Optionals-%26-Conditionals/assets/conditionals-fixed.zip)
- [Conditionals - Repl.it](https://repl.it/classroom/invite/YcGNSq7)

<!-- > -->

## Optionals

Optionals are a special type in Swift.

An optional can represent a value or the absence of a value.

Sometimes we need to represent the absence of a value and not just with an empty string.

```swift
var name = "Nadia"
var fosterDog = "Lentil"
```

<aside class="notes">
In the example, Nadia is someone who fosters dogs for a few weeks. there might be times when she's not fostering a dog, in that case, the value for fosterDog could be an empty string, but it's better if it's a nil value, it's less confusing for programmers.
</aside>

<!-- v -->

## Sentinel values

A valid value that represents a special condition such as the absence of a value is known as a **sentinel value**.

```swift
var fosterDog = ""
```
<aside class="notes">
That’s what the empty string would be in the example. But this way of representing the absence of a value can sometimes be confusing for programmers.
</aside>

<!-- v -->

## Nil

We need an explicit way to represent the absence of a value. This would be using **nil**. Swift gives us optionals, that can handle the possibility of a value to be **nil**.

Handling a **non-optional** - we're guaranteed to have a value

Handling an **optional** - we must handle the nil case

This is how we remove the ambiguity introduced by using sentinel values.

```swift
var fosterDog = nil
```

<!-- v -->

<iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/IOYyCHGWJq4" data-autoplay  width="700" height="500" ></iframe>

<!-- v -->

## Optionals

Optionals are similar to the Schrödinger cat. An optional can both represent the value or the absence of a value.

But we don't know what it holds until we directly go and check.

```swift
var fosterDog: String?
```

<aside class="notes">
That is the syntax for an optional. We use ? at the end. This variable is of type optional String. Meaning it's value is like a box containing a String value or nil.
</aside>

<!-- > -->

## Unwrapping Optionals

```swift
var fosterDog: String?
print(fosterDog)

Optional("Lentil")
```

This what will happen if we print out the value of an optional. The result is an optional that contains the value Lentil.

This isn't wrong, but what we want is to get the value out of the box to print it.

We need to **unwrap** the value from the box.

<!-- v -->

## Force unwrapping

We can force unwrap the value using an exclamation mark.

```swift
var fosterDog: String?
var unwrappedDog = fosterDog!
print("The dog's name is \(unwrappedDog)")

The dog's name is Lentil
```

<aside class="notes">
The exclamation mark after the variable name tells the compiler that we want to look inside the box and take out the value.
</aside>

<!-- v -->

What happens if we force unwrap the following?

```swift
fosterDog = nil
print("The dog's name is \(fosterDog)")

```

```swift
Fatal error: Unexpectedly found nil while unwrapping an Optional value
```

<aside class="notes">
It will produce an error. Since we are trying to force taking out something of the box, when it's nil. When this happens during runtime, it will crash our app. Force unwrapping should be used sparingly.
</aside>

<!-- v -->

## Unwrapping the safe way

```swift
if fosterDog != nil {
  print("The dog's name is \(fosterDog!)")
} else {
  print("Not fostering right now.")
}
```

The if statement checks if the optional contains nil. If it's not nil then there's a value we can unwrap.

<aside class="notes">
If we use this method, we'll need to remember to check for nil every time we want to unwrap an optional. There's an easier way to do this.
</aside>

<!-- > -->

## Optional binding

Swift has a feature known as optional binding that lets you access the value inside an optional in a safe way.

```swift
if let unwrappedDog = fosterDog {
  print("The dog's name is \(unwrappedDog)")
} else {
  print("Not fostering right now.")
}
```
<aside class="notes">
Optional binding gets rid of the optional type and there's no need to use the exclamation mark to force unwrap. If the optional contains a value, this value is unwrapped and bound to the constant unwrappedDog. The if statement then executes the first block of code, where we can safely use unwrappedDog, now being a non-optional String.

If it's nil then the if statement executes the else block.

</aside>

<!-- v -->

```swift
if let fosterDog = fosterDog {
  print("The dog's name is \(fosterDog)")
} else {
  print("Not fostering right now.")
}
```

It's common practice to name the unwrapped constant or variable with the same name as the optional.

<!-- > -->

## Guard

Sometimes you we want to check a condition and only continue executing a function if the condition is true.

Swift has a guard statement that works for those situations.

```swift
func maybeFostering(fosterDog: String?) {
  guard let fosterDog = fosterDog else {
    print("Not fostering dogs right now.")
    return
  }

  print("The name of the dog is \(fosterDog).")
}

maybeFostering(fosterDog: nil)
maybeFostering(fosterDog: "Lentil")
```
<aside class="notes">
The guard keyword is followed by a condition that can include both Boolean expressions and optional bindings, followed by else, then a block of code that will only execute if the condition is false. Immediately then we must return.

The happy path is what comes if the condition is true and for readability it will be on the left of the code. Also, anything checked in the guard statement’s condition must be true for the remainder of the function and we can safely use their values.
</aside>

<!-- > -->

## Nil-coalescing

The last way of getting a value out of an optional. This one we use it when we **always** want something back.

If the value inside the optional is nil, we give a **default value**.

This is called nil-coalescing.

```swift
var optionalNumber: Int? = 8
var result: Int
if let unwrapped = optionalNumber {
  result = unwrapped
} else {
  result = 0
}
```

```swift
var optionalNumber: Int? = 8
var result = optionalNumber ?? 0
```

<!-- > -->

### Questions

**Q1:** How would you declare a double named `height` with a value of 4.2 that can be set to `nil` at a later date?
<!--var height: Double? = 4.2-->

**Q2:** What is the purpose of the following code?

```swift
if height != nil {

}
```
<!--checks that height contains a value-->

**Q3:** which of the following code snippets uses VALID optional binding syntax?

1. `if let dogName = owner.dogs.first { }` <!--correct-->
1. `if dogName = owner.dogs.first { }`
1. `if let dogName = owner.dogs.first! { }`
1. `if let dogName == owner.dogs.first { }` 

**Q4:** In your own words, what is the purpose of `guard`?
<!--to simply control flow, communicate intent, and eliminate invalid parameters early on-->

**Stretch Question:** what will be returned at the end of the function call?

```swift
func calculateResult(a: Int?, b: Int?, c: Int?) -> Int {
    guard let aValue = a else { return 0 }
    guard let bValue = b else ( return aValue }
    guard let cValue = c else {return bValue }
    
    return aValue + bValue + cValue
}

calculateResult(a: 4, b: 8, c: nil)
```

<!--returns 8, as it hits the return statement in the cValue guard-->

<!-- > -->

## In Class Activity

- [Optionals - Repl.it](https://repl.it/classroom/invite/YhH356u)
- For more practice: [Optionals - playground](https://github.com/Make-School-Courses/MOB-1.1-Introduction-to-Swift/blob/master/Lessons/02-Optionals-%26-Conditionals/assets/Optionals.playground.zip)

<!-- > -->

## After Class

- Check out the **toggle** function that you can apply to booleans directly.
- Find out how you can unwrap several values at the same time to avoid something called **pyramid of doom**.
- Complete classwork and mark progress in tracker.

<!-- > -->

## Additional Resources

- [Article on Optionals](https://hackernoon.com/swift-optionals-explained-simply-e109a4297298)
- [Explaining the guard statement](https://thatthinginswift.com/guard-statement-swift/)

Commit message:

added as? and as! questions

Lessons/02-Optionals-&-Conditionals/README.md, after:

<!-- Run this slideshow via the following command: -->
<!-- reveal-md README.md -w -->


<!-- .slide: class="header" -->
# Optionals and Conditionals

## [Slides](https://make-school-courses.github.io/MOB-1.1-Introduction-to-Swift/Slides/02-Optionals-&-Conditionals/README.html ':ignore')

<!-- > -->

## Agenda

- Learning Objectives
- Conditionals
- Activity on Conditionals
- Break
- Optionals
- Activity on Optionals
- Wrap Up

<!-- > -->

## Learning Objectives

By the end of this lesson, students should be able to:

1. Use conditional statements in Swift
1. Identify and use optionals in Swift code
1. Understand the importance of optional binding
1. List & apply ways for unwrapping an optional value

<!-- > -->

## Initial Exercise

Questions from the Repl.its?

General questions?

<!-- > -->

## Conditionals

Swift has several constructs to handle control flow in a program. Using comparison operators and the type Boolean we can manipulate the flow of our apps.

<aside class="notes">
When we have a program and want to tell it to go through a specific path, we evaluate a condition before choosing the path. This is how we manage control flow in our programs.
</aside>

<!-- v -->

### Comparison operators


|          |                           |
|:--------:|:-------------------------:|
|   >=     | greater than or equal to  |
|   >      | greater than              |
|   <=     | less than or equal to     |
|   <      | less than                 |
|   !=     | not equal to              |
|   ==     | equal to                  |
|   &&     | and                       |
|   ||     | or                        |

<aside class="notes">
*and* and *or* will let us combine operators

*and* used to check if both conditions are true

*or* used to check if at least one condition is true
</aside>

<!-- v -->

### (4 < 8 && 6 > 8) || 1 < 2

<aside class="notes">
quick check: is this true or false?
</aside>

<!-- > -->

## if Statement

The most common way to control the flow of a program.

Allows the program to execute the block **only** if the condition is true.

```swift
if "some" != "sum" {
  print("These are not the same word.")
}
```

<aside class="notes">
If the condition is true, then the statement will execute the code between the braces. If the condition is false, it will skip the block of code.
</aside>

<!-- v -->

### else Clause

Extending the if statement

```swift
let color = "purple"

if color == "red" || color == "green" || color == "blue" {
  print("This is a primary color")
} else {
  print("This is not a primary color")
}
```

<aside class="notes">
We can extend an if statement to have code run in case the condition is false.
</aside>

<!-- v -->

#### Question

What will print to the console?

```swift
var weight = 52

if weight <= 50 {
    print("Have a great flight.")
} else {
    print("There is a $25 fee for your luggage.")
}
```

<!-- v -->

### else if Clause

```swift
let studentCount = 35
var message = ""

if studentCount < 5 {
  message = "Class won't run"
} else if studentCount < 25{
  message = "Class will run"
} else if studentCount < 30 {
  message = "Class is packed"
} else {
  message = "We need another section"
}
print(message)
```

Nested if statements test multiple conditions one by one until a condition is true. Only the code associated with that first true condition is executed, regardless of whether subsequent else-if conditions are true. Order matters!

<aside class="notes">
Sometimes we want to check one condition after another. We use the else-if clause to nest an if statement in the else clause of a previous if statement.
The last else clause is optional. We might not always need it.
</aside>

<!-- v -->

### Small prompt

Having:

```swift
let a = 5
let b = 10

var min: Int
var max: Int
```

Write code that will save the smaller number in *min* and the greater number in *max*.

<!-- v -->

### Ternary operator

```swift
(<CONDITION>) ? <TRUE VALUE> : <FALSE VALUE>
```

```swift
a < b ? a : b
a > b ? a : b
```
<aside class="notes">
The ternary operator takes a condition and returns one of two values, depending on whether the condition was true or false.
</aside>

<!-- v -->

### Question

What is the value of `mood` after executing the following:

```swift
let numberOfCookies = 3

let mood = numberOfCookies > 2 ? 😊 : 😔
```

<!-- > -->

## In Class Activity

- [Conditionals - Playground](https://github.com/Make-School-Courses/MOB-1.1-Introduction-to-Swift/blob/master/Lessons/02-Optionals-%26-Conditionals/assets/conditionals-fixed.zip)
- [Conditionals - Repl.it](https://repl.it/classroom/invite/YcGNSq7)

<!-- > -->

## Optionals

Optionals are a special type in Swift.

An optional can represent a value or the absence of a value.

Sometimes we need to represent the absence of a value and not just with an empty string.

```swift
var name = "Nadia"
var fosterDog = "Lentil"
```

<aside class="notes">
In the example, Nadia is someone who fosters dogs for a few weeks. there might be times when she's not fostering a dog, in that case, the value for fosterDog could be an empty string, but it's better if it's a nil value, it's less confusing for programmers.
</aside>

<!-- v -->

## Sentinel values

A valid value that represents a special condition such as the absence of a value is known as a **sentinel value**.

```swift
var fosterDog = ""
```
<aside class="notes">
That’s what the empty string would be in the example. But this way of representing the absence of a value can sometimes be confusing for programmers.
</aside>

<!-- v -->

## Nil

We need an explicit way to represent the absence of a value. This would be using **nil**. Swift gives us optionals, that can handle the possibility of a value to be **nil**.

Handling a **non-optional** - we're guaranteed to have a value

Handling an **optional** - we must handle the nil case

This is how we remove the ambiguity introduced by using sentinel values.

```swift
var fosterDog = nil
```

<!-- v -->

<iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/IOYyCHGWJq4" data-autoplay  width="700" height="500" ></iframe>

<!-- v -->

## Optionals

Optionals are similar to the Schrödinger cat. An optional can both represent the value or the absence of a value.

But we don't know what it holds until we directly go and check.

```swift
var fosterDog: String?
```

<aside class="notes">
That is the syntax for an optional. We use ? at the end. This variable is of type optional String. Meaning it's value is like a box containing a String value or nil.
</aside>

<!-- > -->

## Unwrapping Optionals

```swift
var fosterDog: String?
print(fosterDog)

Optional("Lentil")
```

This what will happen if we print out the value of an optional. The result is an optional that contains the value Lentil.

This isn't wrong, but what we want is to get the value out of the box to print it.

We need to **unwrap** the value from the box.

<!-- v -->

## Force unwrapping

We can force unwrap the value using an exclamation mark.

```swift
var fosterDog: String?
var unwrappedDog = fosterDog!
print("The dog's name is \(unwrappedDog)")

The dog's name is Lentil
```

<aside class="notes">
The exclamation mark after the variable name tells the compiler that we want to look inside the box and take out the value.
</aside>

<!-- v -->

What happens if we force unwrap the following?

```swift
fosterDog = nil
print("The dog's name is \(fosterDog)")

```

```swift
Fatal error: Unexpectedly found nil while unwrapping an Optional value
```

<aside class="notes">
It will produce an error. Since we are trying to force taking out something of the box, when it's nil. When this happens during runtime, it will crash our app. Force unwrapping should be used sparingly.
</aside>

<!-- v -->

## Unwrapping the safe way

```swift
if fosterDog != nil {
  print("The dog's name is \(fosterDog!)")
} else {
  print("Not fostering right now.")
}
```

The if statement checks if the optional contains nil. If it's not nil then there's a value we can unwrap.

<aside class="notes">
If we use this method, we'll need to remember to check for nil every time we want to unwrap an optional. There's an easier way to do this.
</aside>

<!-- > -->

## Optional binding

Swift has a feature known as optional binding that lets you access the value inside an optional in a safe way.

```swift
if let unwrappedDog = fosterDog {
  print("The dog's name is \(unwrappedDog)")
} else {
  print("Not fostering right now.")
}
```
<aside class="notes">
Optional binding gets rid of the optional type and there's no need to use the exclamation mark to force unwrap. If the optional contains a value, this value is unwrapped and bound to the constant unwrappedDog. The if statement then executes the first block of code, where we can safely use unwrappedDog, now being a non-optional String.

If it's nil then the if statement executes the else block.

</aside>

<!-- v -->

```swift
if let fosterDog = fosterDog {
  print("The dog's name is \(fosterDog)")
} else {
  print("Not fostering right now.")
}
```

It's common practice to name the unwrapped constant or variable with the same name as the optional.

<!-- > -->

## Guard

Sometimes you we want to check a condition and only continue executing a function if the condition is true.

Swift has a guard statement that works for those situations.

```swift
func maybeFostering(fosterDog: String?) {
  guard let fosterDog = fosterDog else {
    print("Not fostering dogs right now.")
    return
  }

  print("The name of the dog is \(fosterDog).")
}

maybeFostering(fosterDog: nil)
maybeFostering(fosterDog: "Lentil")
```
<aside class="notes">
The guard keyword is followed by a condition that can include both Boolean expressions and optional bindings, followed by else, then a block of code that will only execute if the condition is false. Immediately then we must return.

The happy path is what comes if the condition is true and for readability it will be on the left of the code. Also, anything checked in the guard statement’s condition must be true for the remainder of the function and we can safely use their values.
</aside>

<!-- > -->

## Nil-coalescing

The last way of getting a value out of an optional. This one we use it when we **always** want something back.

If the value inside the optional is nil, we give a **default value**.

This is called nil-coalescing.

```swift
var optionalNumber: Int? = 8
var result: Int
if let unwrapped = optionalNumber {
  result = unwrapped
} else {
  result = 0
}
```

```swift
var optionalNumber: Int? = 8
var result = optionalNumber ?? 0
```

<!-- > -->

### Questions

**Q1:** How would you declare a double named `height` with a value of 4.2 that can be set to `nil` at a later date?
<!--var height: Double? = 4.2-->

**Q2:** What is the purpose of the following code?

```swift
if height != nil {

}
```
<!--checks that height contains a value-->

**Q3:** which of the following code snippets uses VALID optional binding syntax?

1. `if let dogName = owner.dogs.first { }` <!--correct-->
1. `if dogName = owner.dogs.first { }`
1. `if let dogName = owner.dogs.first! { }`
1. `if let dogName == owner.dogs.first { }` 

**Q4:** In your own words, what is the purpose of `guard`?
<!--to simply control flow, communicate intent, and eliminate invalid parameters early on-->

**Stretch Question:** what will be returned at the end of the function call?

```swift
func calculateResult(a: Int?, b: Int?, c: Int?) -> Int {
    guard let aValue = a else { return 0 }
    guard let bValue = b else ( return aValue }
    guard let cValue = c else {return bValue }
    
    return aValue + bValue + cValue
}

calculateResult(a: 4, b: 8, c: nil)
```

<!--returns 8, as it hits the return statement in the cValue guard-->

<!-- > -->

## In Class Activity

- [Optionals - Repl.it](https://repl.it/classroom/invite/YhH356u)
- For more practice: [Optionals - playground](https://github.com/Make-School-Courses/MOB-1.1-Introduction-to-Swift/blob/master/Lessons/02-Optionals-%26-Conditionals/assets/Optionals.playground.zip)

<!-- > -->

## Review Questions: `as?` and `as!`

**Q1:** When you conditinally downcast from one type to another and store the value in a `constant`, which combination of keywords can you use? _Select all that apply_

1. `as?` <!--correct-->
1. `as!`
1. `is`
1. `if let` <!--correct-->

**Q2:** when is it appropriate to use the `as!` operator?

1. When you need to unwrap an optional
1. When you need to conver a value to an `Any` type
1. When you need to downcast from one type to another, on the condition that the type is valid
1. When you need to downcast from one type to another, and you can guarantee the type is valid <!--correct-->

<!-- > -->

## After Class

- Check out the **toggle** function that you can apply to booleans directly.
- Find out how you can unwrap several values at the same time to avoid something called **pyramid of doom**.
- Complete classwork and mark progress in tracker.

<!-- > -->

## Additional Resources

- [Article on Optionals](https://hackernoon.com/swift-optionals-explained-simply-e109a4297298)
- [Explaining the guard statement](https://thatthinginswift.com/guard-statement-swift/)
